Narrator:
PERHAPS THE MOST
GROUND-BREAKING DISCOVERY
IN THE HISTORY OF MEDICINE
WAS THE DEVELOPMENT
OF PENICILLIN,
ASUBSTANCE,
WHICH UPON ITS DISCOVERY,
WAS CALLED A TRUE MIRACLE.
FINALLY,
A DRUG HAD BEEN FOUND
WHICH COULD CURE PEOPLE
OF THE MOST DREADED
INFECTIONS.
AND ALTHOUGH
SEVERAL PATHOGENIC BACTERIA
BECAME RESISTANT
TO PENICILLIN,
NEW TYPES OF ANTIBIOTICS
WERE FOUND
TO SUPPRESS THESE ILLNESSES.
HOWEVER, DUE TO ABUSE
AND AN OVER-CONSUMPTION
OF PENICILLIN,
MANY PATHOGENIC BACTERIA
SOON OUTWITTED
THE MIRACLE DRUG.
RESISTANT BACTERIA
ARE GAINING GROUND,
AND IN THE MEANWHILE,
THE DEVELOPMENT
OF NEW MEDICINES
HAS PRACTICALLY
COME TO A HALT.
Man: ALLIED CASUALTIES
IN NORMANDY
RECEIVED THE MOST EXPERT
MEDICAL CARE
SCIENCE CAN PROVIDE.
TWO MODERN TREATMENTS,
PENICILLIN
AND BLOOD TRANSFUSION,
HAVE CHEATED DEATH
IN THOUSANDS OF CASES.
GANGRENE, FROM WHICH MILLIONS
HAVE PERISHED IN PAST WARS,
HAS BEEN CONQUERED
BY THE MIRACLE OF PENICILLIN.
THOUSANDS OF MEN,
THANKS TO PENICILLIN,
WILL COME HOME
TO THEIR THANKFUL FAMILIES.
A WHOLE WORLD
OF PEACE-TO-COME
WILL REAP THE BENEFITS
OF THIS GREAT, WARTIME,
MEDICAL DISCOVERY.
SCIENCE HAS WON
ANOTHER VICTORY
OVER DEATH.
THROUGHOUT MOST
OF HUMAN HISTORY,
INFECTIOUS GERMS HAVE CAUSED
DEATH AND DESTRUCTION.
FOR CENTURIES,
DEADLY DISEASES,
SUCH AS THE PLAGUE,
TUBERCULOSIS, AND GANGRENE
HAD BEFALLEN PEOPLE
ALL OVER THE WORLD--
IN THE COUNTRYSIDE,
IN CITIES,
AND ON THE BATTLEFIELD.
Robert Bud:
IF YOU GO BACK 100 YEARS,
TO THE MID-19th CENTURY,
MANY MORE SOLDIERS
DIED OF INFECTION
THAN DIED DIRECTLY
FROM THE EXPLOSIONS
OF CANNONS.
BY WORLD WAR I,
ALREADY THE SYSTEM
WAS CHANGING
BECAUSE THERE WAS
A PROCESS FOR HANDLING
INJURED SOLDIERS.
BUT YOU COULDN'T
CURE INFECTION.
YOU COULD PREVENT IT
BY BANDAGING SOLDIERS
QUICKLY.
BUT OFTEN
THEY SUFFERED GANGRENE,
AND MANY SOLDIERS
DIED FROM INFECTION.
UNTIL THE BEGINNING
OF THE 20th CENTURY,
THE RISK OF INFECTION
HAD MADE IT DIFFICULT
TO TREAT
MANY TYPES OF DISEASES.
Glenn Morris:
THERE WERE SIGNIFICANT
PROBLEMS WITH INFECTIONS
THAT REALLY LIMITED A LOT
OF WHAT WE COULD DO
IN MEDICINE.
FOR EXAMPLE,
STAPH INFECTIONS CAUSED
SIGNIFICANT INFECTIONS
IN CHILDREN AND NEWBORNS.
THEY CONTAMINATED WOUNDS.
SO, FOR EXAMPLE,
WHEN YOU WERE
IN AN AUTOMOBILE ACCIDENT,
THERE WAS ALWAYS
THIS GREAT CONCERN
THAT THERE
WOULD BE INFECTION.
AND SO, IN SOME CASES,
YOU'D ALMOST RATHER
AMPUTATE THE LEG
THAN TAKE THE RISK THAT
THE INFECTION WOULD TAKE OFF.
THE HUNT FOR MEDICINE
THAT CAN CURE
DREADED DISEASES,
SUCH AS SYPHILIS,
GONORRHEA, AND PNEUMONIA,
HAS BEEN GOING ON SINCE
THE BEGINNING OF CIVILIZATION.
BUT IT WAS NOT UNTIL
THE END OF THE 19th CENTURY
THAT THE DISCOVERY OF HOW
INFECTIOUS DISEASES ARE SPREAD
CAME ABOUT.
Stuart Levy:
IT WAS A BIG TURNING POINT
THAT IT WAS DISCOVERED
THAT SINGLE MICROBES
WOULD CAUSE THE DISEASE.
AND THE THOUGHT WAS THERE
THAT IF WE COULD FIND
WHAT WAS THEN
CALLED BY PAUL EHRLICH,
"A MAGIC BULLET"--
SOMETHING THAT
WOULD ENTER THE BODY
AND SEEK OUT THE INVADERS,
NAMELY, THE BACTERIA--
THEN WE COULD CURE
THE PATIENT
WITHOUT HARMING THE PATIENT.
AT THE BEGINNING
OF THE 20th CENTURY,
GERMAN DOCTOR PAUL EHRLICH
DEVELOPED A SUBSTANCE
SIMILAR TO ARSENIC
WITH WHICH TO TREAT
PATIENTS WITH SYPHILIS.
HOWEVER, THIS PROVED
TO BE TOXIC
AND HAD STRONG SIDE-EFFECTS.
THEN, IN 1928,
SCOTTISH DOCTOR
ALEXANDER FLEMING
ACCIDENTALLY STUMBLED UPON
A COMPLETELY NEW MEDICINE.
ONE DAY, WHILST WORKING
WITH BACTERIAL CULTURES,
FLEMING DISCOVERED
A SPOT OF MOLD.
IT WASN'T UNUSUAL
FOR PETRI DISHES
TO BE POLLUTED BY FUNGUS,
BUT THE ODD THING
WAS THAT THE BACTERIA
AROUND THE MOLD
HAD DISAPPEARED.
FLEMING FOUND, THIS FUNGUS
KNOWN AS PENICILLIN,
COULD PREVENT THE GROWTH
OF DANGEROUS BACTERIA,
SUCH AS STAPHYLOCOCCI
AND ANTHRAX.
EXPERIMENTS ON RABBITS
SHOWED THAT PENICILLIN
WAS APPARENTLY HARMLESS,
BUT FLEMING
DIDN'T SUCCEED IN PROVING
THAT THE SUBSTANCE HAD
A CURATIVE EFFECT ON PEOPLE.
THIS HAPPENED
OVER 13 YEARS LATER,
AND PENICILLIN WAS THEN
MASS-PRODUCED
IN THE UNITED STATES.
Man: THROUGH
MASS-PRODUCTION METHODS,
AMERICA IS CONTINUALLY
INCREASING ITS OUTPUT
OF PENICILLIN,
THE NEW DRUG THAT EFFECTS
ALMOST MIRACULOUS CURES.
THE LIQUID MEDIUM
IN THESE BOTTLES
WILL GROW THE MOLD
THAT FORMS PENICILLIN.
ALL PENICILLIN PRODUCED
IS USED BY
THE ALLIED FIGHTING FORCES.
THE LIQUID,
NOW CHARGED WITH PENICILLIN,
IS POURED FROM THE BOTTLES,
TURNED INTO A POWDER...
IT IS READY FOR USE.
THE MANUFACTURE OF PENICILLIN
HAD GREAT SIGNIFICANCE
DURING WORLD WAR II.
ON THE COVER OF TIME MAGAZINE
IN MAY 1944,
IT SAID
THAT FLEMING'S MEDICINE
"WOULD SAVE MORE LIVES
THAN THE WAR COULD SPEND."
PENICILLIN WAS WIDELY USED
TO SAVE THE LIVES OF SOLDIERS
SUFFERING FROM SEPTICEMIA,
BUT ALSO TO CURE
DIFFERENT TYPES OF DISEASE
AMONG SOLDIERS.
EVERY TIME
THERE'S A WAR,
THE VENEREAL DISEASE
RATE TAKES A JUMP.
IT'S BAD ENOUGH
IN PEACE TIME, BUT...
NOW IT'S
LIKE A FOREST FIRE.
NO ORGANIZATION
OF SABOTEURS COULD DO
HALF THIS DAMAGE
TO OUR ARMY.
ONE OF THE CHARACTERISTIC
DISEASES... OF SOLDIERS
ARE SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED
DISEASES.
IF YOU IMAGINE
EUROPE IN 1945,
STARVING WOMEN,
MILLIONS OF SOLDIERS--
YOUNG MEN SEPARATED
FROM THEIR GIRLFRIENDS,
FROM THEIR WIVES--
THERE WAS THE BEGINNING
OF A TERRIBLE SYPHILIS EPIDEMIC.
WE AVERAGE 30 VENEREAL
DISEASE CASES EACH YEAR
OUT OF EVERY
1,000 MEN
IN UNIFORM.
THAT MEANS 300,000 MEN
PUT OUT OF ACTION EACH YEAR
IN A 10-MILLION-MAN ARMY.
( chuckles )
THINK OF THAT,
300,000 CASUALTIES
WITHOUT EVEN A BATTLE.
Robert: YOU COULD
REASONABLY SAY,
I'M SUR--
AND I BELIEVE THIS
TO BE SURE,
THAT HAD THERE
NOT BEEN PENICILLIN,
THEN SYPHILIS
WOULD'VE BEEN FOR EUROPE
WHAT AIDS LATER BECAME
FOR AFRICA.
AND THAT MEMORY
OF THIS WONDER DRUG
IS VERY IMPORTANT
IN UNDERSTANDING WHY LATER,
WE CAME TO ASSUME
THAT PENICILLIN
WOULD SOLVE EVERY
ONE OF OUR PROBLEMS.
IN THE POST-WAR ERA,
A LONG LINE
OF NEW ANTIBIOTICS
THAT COULD CURE
MANY MAJOR DISEASES
WAS DEVELOPED.
STREPTOMYCIN, FOR EXAMPLE,
CURES TUBERCULOSIS,
AND TETRACYCLINE
IS USED TO TREAT PNEUMONIA.
IN JUST UNDER 30 YEARS,
THE MORTALITY RATE
OF YOUNG PATIENTS
SUFFERING FROM PNEUMONIA
FELL TENFOLD.
Stuart: WHEN ANTIBIOTICS
WERE INTRODUCED,
THERE WAS A SHARP DECLINE
IN THE LOSS OF LIFE
AND HOSPITALIZATION
OF PATIENTS
WITH PNEUMONIAS,
URINARY TRACT INFECTIONS,
SKIN INFECTIONS...
I THINK IT HAD A ENORMOUS,
ENORMOUS EFFECT,
AND I THINK THIS IS WHY
MANY IN THE
CLINICAL MEDICINE FIELD
BELIEVE THAT ANTIBIOTICS
ARE ONE OF THE TREASURES
THAT WE HAVE
IN OUR ARMAMENTARIUM
TO TREAT PATIENTS.
OF COURSE,
THEN IT IS USED
NOT JUST
FOR THE GRAVELY ILL,
BUT FOR PEOPLE SUFFERING
THOSE IRRITATING ILLNESSES
WHICH WE HAVE EVERY DAY.
THE IRRITATING INFECTIONS,
THE SORE THROATS,
THE SORE FINGERS,
AND OF COURSE,
MAYBE EVEN...
WE THINK THESE
WILL NOT ONLY
MAKE MY LIFE LONGER,
BUT ALSO HAPPIER.
( David Rose's
"The Stripper" plays )
Woman: NOXZEMA MEDICATED SHAVE.
Stuart: IN FACT,
YOU COULD GET PENICILLIN
IN FACE CREAMS.
YOU COULD GET IT
IN COSMETICS.
AND THE EFFECT OF THAT,
OF COURSE,
WAS IF YOU HAD
A SMALL INFECTION,
IT WOULD WORK,
BUT BASICALLY,
THE WHOLE IDEA
THAT WAS CONCEIVED
WAS THAT THIS
WAS A MIRACLE DRUG
FOR MANY DIFFERENT AILMENTS.
IN THE LATE 1940s,
A NEW PROPERTY OF ANTIBIOTICS
WAS DISCOVERED
WHICH HAD GREAT INFLUENCE
ON THE PRODUCTION
OF PIGS, CHICKENS,
AND OTHER LIVESTOCK.
Stuart:
ONE OF THE MANUFACTURERS
OF A TETRACYCLINE,
WHICH COMES
FROM A SOIL ORGANISM,
HAD THIS HUGE POUNDS
AND POUNDS AND POUNDS
OF THE PROTEIN LEFT OVER
FROM THE ORGANISM
AFTER THEY HAD EXTRACTED
THEIR TETRACYCLINE.
AND THEY WONDERED
IF IT COULDN'T BE
PUT TO SOME USE,
SUCH AS BEING USED
AS FEED FOR CHICKENS
AND OTHER ANIMALS.
WHEN THEY ADDED THIS...
CARCASSES OF BACTERIA
TO THE NORMAL FEED,
THEY FOUND THAT THE ANIMALS
GREW BIGGER FOR LESS FEED.
AND THE DISCOVERERS
THOUGHT THEY HAD FOUND
A NEW VITAMIN.
( chickens clucking )
Henrik Wegener:
RATHER EARLY ON,
THEY REALIZED THAT
IT WAS ACTUALLY
THE FACT THAT
THERE WAS STILL
ANTIBIOTICS LEFT
IN THIS PRODUCT
THAT MADE THE ANIMALS
GROW FASTER.
AND I-IT
WAS THEN REALIZED
THAT IF THEY JUST ADDED,
UH, LOW AMOUNTS--
FAIRLY LOW AMOUNTS
OF ANTIBIOTICS TO THE FEED
THROUGHOUT THE LIFE
OF THE ANIMAL,
IT WOULD GROW FASTER
THAN WOULD
OTHERWISE BE THE CASE.
SO, ANTIBIOTICS
VERY QUICKLY BECAME
A PRODUCTION TOOL.
NOT A MEDICINE.
IT WAS NOT
EVEN TALKED ABOUT
OR SEEN AS A MEDICINE.
Stuart: IT CHANGED
THE INDUSTRY OVERNIGHT.
ANIMAL PRODUCERS WORLDWIDE
BEGAN TO SEEK OUT
ANTIBIOTICS TO ADD
BACK TO THE FEED
OR BUY IT ALREADY IN IT.
AND NO ONE WAS
PARTICULARLY CONCERNED
ABOUT WHAT IT MIGHT BE DOING
OUTSIDE THE ANIMAL.
( chickens clucking )
IN THE 1950s,
THE SALES OF ANTIBIOTICS
BECAME BIG BUSINESS,
AND THOUSANDS OF TONS
WERE USED TO COMBAT DISEASES.
AND IN LIVESTOCK,
IT WAS USED
AS A GROWTH PROMOTER.
THE MIRACLE DRUG,
HOWEVER,
BEGAN TO HAVE ITS DRAWBACKS.
Glenn: FAIRLY SOON
AFTER THEIR INTRODUCTION,
THERE WAS A SMALL CLOUD
ON THE HORIZON,
IN THAT, INITIALLY,
STAPHYLOCOCCI,
UM, WHICH
WERE ONE OF THE...
BACTERIA--
ONE OF THE GROUPS
OF BACTERIA
THAT ONE WAS
REALLY CONCERNED ABOUT
IN TERMS OF SERIOUS WOUNDS
AND WOUND INFECTIONS,
BEGAN TO SHOW
RESISTANCE TO PENICILLIN.
PATHOGENIC BACTERIA
COULD APPARENTLY
BECOME RESISTANT
TO PENICILLIN.
BACK IN 1945,
IN THE NEW YORK TIMES,
ALEXANDER FLEMING
WARNED AGAINST
THE UNCONTROLLED USE
OF PENICILLIN,
AND ALSO POINTED OUT
THAT TAKING TOO SMALL A DOSE
MADE A GOOD BREEDING GROUND,
AS BACTERIA COULD SURVIVE
SMALL DOSES.
NO ONE TOOK NOTICE
OF FLEMING'S WARNING,
AND IT WASN'T UNTIL THE 1960's
THAT PEOPLE REALIZED
THE MIRACLE DRUG COULD FAIL.
Robert: LATE IN 1967,
THERE WAS A SMALL OUTBREAK
OF AN E. COLI
IN THE CHILDREN'S WARD
IN A HOSPITAL
IN NORTHEAST OF ENGLAND
IN MIDDLESBROUGH.
ELEVEN CHILDREN DIED.
ALMOST ALL OF THEM,
VERY WEAK.
THEY HAD BEEN BORN
PREMATURELY.
AND AS FAR AS THE MEDICAL
PROFESSION WAS CONCERNED,
THIS WAS NOT EITHER UNUSUAL
OR TERRIFYING.
IT WAS DISTURBING
BECAUSE THE E. COLI
WHICH KILLED THESE CHILDREN
WAS RESISTANT TO ANTIBIOTICS.
AND THE PRESS IN 1967
REALIZED
THE PUBLIC DID NOT KNOW
THAT CHILDREN WERE DYING
IN BRITISH HOSPITALS
OF E. COLI.
THIS BECAME
A TERRIBLE SCANDAL.
AND E. S. ANDERSON,
A VERY ACTIVE SCIENTIST
WITHIN THE PUBLIC HEALTH
LABORATORY,
WARNED THAT IT
WAS CONCEIVABLE--
HE COULDN'T PROVE IT--
BUT IT WAS POSSIBLE
THAT THE RESISTANCE
WHICH E. COLI HAD ACQUIRED
HAD BEEN DEVELOPED
IN ANIMALS.
SO, THAT,
HERE WAS AN EXAMPLE
POSSIBLY A WARNING
OF A MUCH WORSE
EPIDEMIC TO COME.
DUE TO PUBLIC CONCERN,
THE BRITISH PARLIAMENT
SET UP A COMMITTEE
TO INVESTIGATE WHETHER THE USE
OF ANTIBIOTICS IN LIVESTOCK
COULD INCREASE THE GROWTH
OF RESISTANT
PATHOGENIC BACTERIA.
Henrik:
THE SWAN COMMITTEE
CAME UP WITH SOME
VERY BOLD CONCLUSIONS
THAT ANIMALS
WERE A SOURCE
OF RESISTANT
BACTERIAL INFECTIONS
IN HUMANS,
AND THAT THE USE
OF ANTIBIOTICS
IN THE ANIMALS
DID MAKE THE BACTERIA
RESISTANT.
SO THEY...
ACTUALLY CLAIMED,
AND TO SOME EXTENT,
PROVED A LINK BETWEEN
THE USE OF ANTIBIOTICS
IN ANIMALS
AND RESISTANT BACTERIA
IN HUMANS.
THE SWAN COMMITTEE'S
RECOMMENDATIONS
BROUGHT ABOUT A BAN,
FIRST, IN ENGLAND,
AND LATER,
IN OTHER EUROPEAN COUNTRIES.
IN HUSBANDRY,
FOUR DIFFERENT TYPES
OF ANTIBIOTICS WERE BANNED,
AS THEY ARE VITAL
IN COMBATING HUMAN DISEASES.
BUT THE USE OF OTHER TYPES
OF ANTIBIOTICS
AS GROWTH PROMOTERS
IN LIVESTOCK
CONTINUED TO RISE.
IN THE EARLY 1970's,
MORE AND MORE RESISTANT
BACTERIA TYPES WERE FOUND.
THE AGGRESSIVE STAPHYLOCOCCUS
HAD LONG SINCE
SURVIVED PENICILLIN,
BUT UP UNTIL THEN,
NEW TYPES OF ANTIBIOTICS
HAD MANAGED TO SUPPRESS
THIS MOST DANGEROUS BACTERIA.
Glenn:
BY THE TIME I RECEIVED
MY MEDICAL TRAINING
IN THE EARLY 1970's,
THERE WAS GENERAL ACCEPTANCE
THAT ONE NEVER USED
PENICILLIN FOR STAPHYLOCOCCI.
ONE WOULD OCCASIONALLY
GET A PATIENT
WHO CAME IN
FROM THE COMMUNITY
WITH A STAPHYLOCOCCAL
INFECTION,
THAT WAS
PENICILLIN-SENSITIVE.
BUT THAT WAS ALWAYS
SOMETHING, YOU KNOW,
THAT WAS REMARKABLE,
THAT YOU WOULD COMMENT ON...
"OH, LOOK!
WE GOT AN OLD, UH...
"STAPHYLOCOCCI STRAIN
THAT, YOU KNOW,
IS STILL PEN-SENSITIVE."
BUT WE HAD ANOTHER DRUG
THAT WAS, UH, YOU KNOW,
RELATED TO THE ORIGINAL
PENICILLIN DESIGN.
AND SO, CONSEQUENTLY,
PEOPLE DIDN'T THINK
TOO MUCH ABOUT IT.
BUT THERE WERE GROUNDS
FOR CONCERN,
FOR IN THE 1970's,
DISEASES WHICH PREVIOUSLY
HAD BEEN PARTLY SUPPRESSED
RETURNED.
THE NUMBER OF CASES
OF TUBERCULOSIS BEGAN TO RISE,
AND GONORRHEA
COULD NO LONGER BE CURED
BY MANY TYPES OF ANTIBIOTICS.
MANY PATHOGENIC BACTERIA
BEGAN TO SHOW SIGNS
OF MULTI-RESISTANCE.
Stuart: WELL, IF YOU HAVE
A COMMUNITY OF BACTERIA,
OF WHICH ONE OR TWO
HAVE PICKED UP
A RESISTANCE TRAIT,
AND YOU ADD
THE ANTIBIOTIC,
ONLY THOSE
WITH THE RESISTANCE
WILL SURVIVE,
AND THE NEXT THING
YOU KNOW,
YOU HAVE A COMMUNITY
OF RESISTANT BACTERIA.
AND YEAH, THEY ARE
KIND OF TRADING WEAPONS.
IT'S ALMOST, YOU KNOW,
LIKE TRADING BASEBALL CARDS,
IN WHICH YOU GIVE ME YOURS,
I GIVE YOU YOURS.
BUT OFTEN, THEY DON'T
LOSE THE ONE THEY GIVE.
THEY JUST MAKE ANOTHER COPY
AND GIVE IT
TO A NEXT BACTERIUM.
THERE'S NO PURPOSE IN IT.
I MEAN, THIS IS ALL
EVENTS THAT ARE HAPPENING,
BUT YOU'RE TALKING
ABOUT MILLIONS OF BACTERIA,
YOU KNOW,
SITTING ON THE SPACE
OF A TIP OF A PIN!
THEY'RE VERY CLOSE TOGETHER.
THEY CAN EXCHANGE
LOTS OF THINGS.
AND THEN THEY SEPARATE OUT,
GROW AGAIN,
AND IF THEY'RE CONFRONTED
WITH AN ANTIBIOTIC,
THEY'LL SURVIVE
IF THEY'RE RESISTANT.
AND THEY'LL DIE
IF THEY DON'T.
ONE OF THE MOST DREADED
BACTERIA,
THE GOLDEN STAPHYLOCOCCUS
AUREUS,
HAD ALSO BECOME
MULTI-RESISTANT.
FOR SEVERAL YEARS,
STAPHYLOCOCCUS AUREUS
WAS RESISTANT TO PENICILLIN,
BUT NOW, THE BACTERIA
COULD NOT BE SUPPRESSED
BY PENICILLIN'S SUCCESSOR,
METHICILLIN.
MRSA, OR "THE SUPER BUG,"
AS IT'S ALSO CALLED,
IS DREADED IN EVERY HOSPITAL,
BECAUSE IT CAN SPREAD INFECTION
DURING OPERATIONS,
AND THEREBY DISRUPT
PATIENT TREATMENT.
Glenn: YOU HAVE PATIENTS WHO
GO IN FOR WHAT SHOULD'VE--
SOMETHING THEY
LOOK FORWARD TO--
WHICH SHOULD
BE A HIP SURGERY,
WHICH WILL LET THEM
WALK AGAIN WITH EASE,
AND INSTEAD, THEY EMERGE,
YOU KNOW, MONTHS LATER,
AFTER, YOU KNOW,
MONTHS OF ANTIBIOTICS,
HOSPITALIZATION, THERAPY,
WITH A TOTALLY
DYSFUNCTIONAL JOINT
AND COMPLETE DISABILITY.
I MEAN,
WHAT WE SEE IS THAT
THESE ARE
DEVASTATING INFECTIONS,
AND THE INCREASING
PROBLEMS WITH TREATING THEM
CAN PARTICULARLY
FOR INDIVIDUAL PATIENTS--
CAN BE DEVASTATING.
Man: ON TOP OF
A MOTORCYCLE ACCIDENT,
MRSA IS SOMETHING BOB RICE
REALLY DIDN'T NEED.
THE GERM, UM,
ALSO CAUSED INFECTIONS
IN OTHER AREAS
ON MANY OF THESE SITES
WHERE WE HAVE WHAT WE CALL
"THE DONOR SITES"
FOR PLASTIC SURGERY...
PLUS OTHER OPEN AREAS.
AND INCLUDING, UM,
THE INTRAVENOUS, UH,
ACCESS SITE THAT HE NEEDED,
SO HE COULD RECEIVE
FLUIDS AND DRUGS,
AND HE GOT AN INFECTION
ON WHAT WE CALL
"THE CENTRAL LINE,"
WHICH IS PLACED UP HERE,
AND INTO ONE
OF THE LARGE VEINS.
AND THEN HE DEVELOPED, UM,
INFECTION IN HIS BLOODSTREAM
FROM THAT
THAT, UH,
REQUIRED ONGOING
AND QUITE PROLONGED
ANTIBIOTICS.
ROGER PUDNEY
WAS NOT SO LUCKY.
AN ABSCESS IN ONE LEG
FROM A SUSPECTED
SPIDER BITE
CHANGED HIS LIFE
FOR THE WORST.
FOR SIX MONTHS,
HE WAS ISOLATED
AND PUMPED FULL
OF ANTIBIOTICS.
BUTROGER PUDNEY
LOST THE FIGHT.
THE ONLY RECOURSE
WAS AMPUTATION.
MRSA BACTERIA QUICKLY SPREAD
AROUND THE WORLD,
MUCH TO THE CONCERN
OF HEALTH AUTHORITIES,
AS THERE WAS NOW
A DIMINISHING NUMBER
OF NEW TYPES OF ANTIBIOTICS
WHICH COULD SUBSTITUTE
PREVIOUS ONES.
THE DRUG INDUSTRY
HAD PRACTICALLY GIVEN UP
ON FINDING NEW TYPES
OF ANTIBIOTICS.
IT'S RISKY.
I MEAN, THEY'VE
ALREADY LOOKED VERY HARD
WITHOUT FINDING ANYONE,
SO THE CHANCE THAT
THEY ARE GOING TO FIND
SOMETHING VERY EFFECTIVE
IS NOT AS HIGH
AS IT WAS IN THE PAST.
AND ALSO, EVEN IF
THEY FIND A DRUG,
GETTING IT APPROVED
IS A VERY LENGTHY
AND VERY COSTLY PROCESS
THAT ALSO HAS
A VERY HIGH RISK
OF NOT LEADING
TO A PRODUCT
THAT GOES TO MARKET
AT THE END OF THE DAY.
SO INDUSTRY IS--IS PRONE
TO GO ANOTHER DIRECTION
WHERE THERE
IS MORE CHANCE
OF MAKING A PROFIT.
THE DREADED
MULTI-RESISTANT MRSA
COULD STILL BE WIPED OUT
BY ONE ANTIBIOTIC,
VANCOMYCIN,
WHICH WAS ONE OF MEDICAL
SCIENCE'S LAST BIG GUNS
TO BE FIRED
AT ADVANCING BACTERIA.
VANCOMYCIN, HOWEVER,
ALSO HAD DRAWBACKS
WHEN TREATING
ANOTHER BACTERIA STRAIN,
NAMELY, THE LESS AGGRESSIVE
ENTEROCOCCUS BACTERIA--
VANCOMYCIN-RESISTANT
ENTEROCOCCI,
OR VRE.
Glenn: WE PICKED UP
THE FIRST STRAIN
OF VRE IN 1989,
AND WE SORT OF THOUGHT,
YOU KNOW, AGAIN,
WHEN THESE THINGS SHOW UP,
IT'S SORT OF AN ODDITY.
YOU KNOW,
THE DIRECTOR OF THE LAB--
OF THE CLINICAL
MICROBIOLOGY LABORATORY
CALLED ME UP AND SAID,
"YOU KNOW, GUESS WHAT
WE FOUND?"
IT WAS SORT OF EXCITING,
FUN, NOVEL.
UM, AND WE DIDN'T THINK
THAT MUCH ABOUT IT.
UH, BUT THEN
ALL OF A SUDDEN,
YOU KNOW,
OVER THE NEXT YEAR OR TWO,
WE STARTED SEEING
MORE OF THEM,
AND MORE OF THEM,
AND MORE OF THEM.
AND IT STOPPED BEING
A NOVELTY,
AND STARTED TO BECOME
A VERY SERIOUS MEDICAL PROBLEM.
Stuart:
UP TO THIS TIME,
VANCOMYCIN
WAS BEGINNING TO BE USED
TO TREAT THE STAPH AUREUS,
WHICH WAS RESISTANT
TO MOST OTHER ANTIBIOTICS.
SO, IT WAS A LIFE-SAVING
ANTIBIOTIC.
SO, NOW, YOU SEE
ANOTHER BACTERIUM
CARRYING
VANCOMYCIN RESISTANCE.
THAT WAS NOT GOOD.
AND I CAN REMEMBER
THAT THERE WERE HOSPITALS
THAT HAD THE PROBLEM,
BUT MANY THAT DID NOT.
BUT BY THE MID-1990's,
VIRTUALLY EVERY HOSPITAL
HAD VRE.
WE HAD DEATHS
IN THIS HOSPITAL,
DUE TO VANCOMYCIN-RESISTANT
ENTEROCOCCI.
DEATHS WHERE
IF THE PATIENT
HAD BEEN INFECTED
WITH A SUSCEPTIBLE
ENTEROCOCCI,
WE COULD'VE SAVED THEM.
THESE WERE PATIENTS WHO
WE HAD DONE
HORRENDOUS THINGS TO,
IN THE SENSE OF, YOU KNOW,
THESE WERE PATIENTS WHO HAD
HAD CANCER CHEMOTHERAPY
OR A BONE MARROW TRANSPLANT,
OR SOMETHING SIMILAR.
BUT AGAIN, WE HAD DONE
THE BONE MARROW TRANSPLANT
WITH THE ASSUMPTION
THAT WE COULD ALWAYS TREAT
WHATEVER INFECTION RESULTED.
AND NOW SUDDENLY,
WE CAN NO LONGER GIVE PATIENTS
THAT REASSURANCE.
WE CAN
NO LONGER TELL THEM,
"DON'T WORRY
IF YOU BECOME INFECTED.
WE CAN TREAT IT."
AND SO WE HAD DEATHS.
IN JUST A FEW YEARS,
VRE BACTERIA WERE WIDESPREAD.
A STUDY OF
AMERICAN HOSPITALS IN 1989
SHOWED THAT
UNDER A HALF PERCENT
OF BACTERIA WERE RESISTANT,
A FIGURE WHICH WOULD RISE,
FOUR YEARS LATER,
TO AN ASTOUNDING
TEN PERCENT.
THE SPREAD OF VRE
CAUSED MUCH CONCERN,
EVEN MORE SO WHEN
DANISH STUDIES SHOWED
THAT VRE BACTERIA DEVELOPED
DURING PIG AND CHICKEN
PRODUCTION
BY A GROWTH PROMOTER THAT
IS RELATED TO VANCOMYCIN.
SO, RESISTANT BACTERIA
IN ANIMALS
WERE RUINING THE EFFECT
OF A VITAL DRUG FOR HUMANS.
Henrik:
THE USE OF AVOPARCIN
DID SELECT FOR...
VANCOMYCIN-RESISTANT
ENTEROCOCCI
IN SWINE PRODUCTION
AND IN POULTRY PRODUCTION,
AND WE PROVED
THAT RESISTANCE GENES
THAT ENCODE RESISTANCE
IN THE BACTERIA
WERE THE SAME
IN THOSE ANIMALS
THAT COULD BE FOUND
IN THE FOOD
AND IN THE HUMANS.
AND WE ALSO SHOWED
THAT RESISTANT
ENTEROCOCCI
COULD TRANSMIT
FROM ANIMALS TO FOOD,
AND MOST LIKELY,
ALSO TO HUMANS.
THE DANISH STUDIES
RESULTED IN A BAN
BY THE EUROPEAN UNION.
FIRST, AVOPARCIN
WAS BANNED IN 1996,
AND DURING THE NEXT TEN YEARS,
ALL GROWTH PROMOTERS
WERE SIMILARLY BANNED
NEVERTHELESS, THE DEVELOPMENT
OF RESISTANT BACTERIA
DIDN'T STOP,
WHICH FOR HOSPITALS
PROVED TO BE A GRAVE PROBLEM.
THE AMERICAN
HEALTH AUTHORITIES ESTIMATED
THAT 1 IN EVERY 20 PATIENTS
BECAME INFECTED
BY PATHOGENIC BACTERIA
WHILST IN HOSPITAL.
RESISTANT BACTERIA
QUICKLY SPREAD IN COUNTRIES
WHERE ANTIBIOTICS
WERE ADMINISTERED
WITHOUT DOCTOR-CONSULTATION.
AND IN COUNTRIES
WHERE ANTIBIOTICS
WERE PRESCRIPTION DRUGS,
PATIENTS PRESSURED DOCTORS
TO PRESCRIBE ANTIBIOTICS
EVEN WHEN
IT WASN'T NECESSARY.
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
ESTIMATED THAT
IN THE TREATING
OF BRONCHIAL INFECTIONS,
UP TO 80% OF
ANTIBIOTIC USE
WAS COMPLETELY UNNECESSARY.
Stuart: OVERUSE AND MISUSE
DOES NO PURPOSE
THERAPEUTICALLY.
AND ALL IT DOES
IS RECRUIT MORE RESISTANCE.
TREAT THE PATIENT,
GET HIM WELL,
THAT'S IT.
BUT IF YOU USE IT
FOR FIVE TIMES MORE
THAN IT'S NEEDED,
OR YOU USE IT WHEN
THERE'S A COLD VIRUS
AND THERE'S NO BACTERIUM,
IT'S A MISUSE THAT
DOES HAVE AN IMPACT,
BECAUSE YOU WIPE OUT
THE SUSCEPTIBLE KINDS
OF BACTERIA,
AND YOU ALLOW
THE RESISTANT ONES
TO TAKE OVER.
( coughs )
RESISTANT PATHOGENIC BACTERIA
HAVE RECENTLY BEEN CLASSIFIED
AS ONE OF THE WORLD'S THREE
GREATEST HEALTH PROBLEMS.
ASTHE WORLD HEALTH
ORGANIZATION STATES,
"THE PIPELINE OF NEW DRUGS
IS RUNNING DRY."
TODAY, OLD DISEASES ARE
REEMERGING WITH A VENGEANCE,
TUBERCULOSIS, FOR INSTANCE,
IS NOW ONE OF THE WORLD'S
BIGGEST KILLERS,
WITH OVER TWO MILLION PEOPLE
DYING FROM IT EVERY YEAR,
AND SOME OF THEM DYING
OF A NEW, MULTI-RESISTANT,
TUBERCULOSIS BACTERIA.
Eva Nathanson:
WE THINK THAT THERE
ARE ABOUT HALF A MILLION
MULTI-DRUG-RESISTANT
TB CASES EVERY YEAR
AROUND THE WORLD.
AND THE ABSOLUTE
MOST DIFFICULT AREAS
IS THE COUNTRIES OF
THE FORMER SOVIET UNION.
THE PROBLEM
IS MDRTB IN PRISONS.
AND ONE OF THE REASONS
IS THAT PRISONERS,
UH, ARE MALNOURISHED.
THEY ARE VULNERABLE.
THEY MAY HAVE HIV.
SO, THEY ARE VULNERABLE
TO GET TB.
PRISONS ARE OVERCROWDED.
I MEAN, PEOPLE
LIVE IN SO SMALL AREAS,
SO THEY HAVE
TO SLEEP IN SHIFTS.
AND THAT MEANS THAT
IF SOMEONE HAS MDRTB,
IT IS TRANSMITTED
VERY RAPIDLY TO OTHERS.
SO, THE PRISONS
IN THESE COUNTRIES
HAVE REALLY BEEN
THE SOURCE
OF THE MDRTB EPIDEMIC.
THE SITUATION
IS REALLY, REALLY SCARY
IN THE FORMER
SOVIET UNION,
AND ALSO
PLACES IN CHINA,
WHERE THE RATES
ARE VERY, VERY HIGH.
BUT WE MUST BE CAREFUL
ALL AROUND THE WORLD
BECAUSE TB DOESN'T STOP
AT BORDERS.
Glenn: FOR THE LAST 50 YEARS,
THE AGE OF ANTIBIOTICS,
WE HAVE HAD,
UH, IF YOU WILL,
A FREE RIDE.
IT'S BEEN WONDERFUL.
AND WHAT WILL HAPPEN
IS THAT
WE WILL BE MOVING INTO
WHAT HAS BEEN TERMED
THE POST-ANTIBIOTIC ERA,
WHERE SUDDENLY
WE GO BACK TO THE WAY
WE WERE IN THE 1920s
AND 1930s,
WHERE INFECTION
WAS THE KILLER.
Stuart:
FINDING NEW ANTIBIOTICS
IS NOT EASY.
THE COMPANIES
THAT COULD DO IT
ARE NOT DOING IT.
AND SO AS
RESISTANCE GETS WORSE,
NEW DRUGS
ARE LAGGING BEHIND.
THAT MAKES THE PROBLEM
EVEN WORSE.
Glenn: THE CONCERN
THAT I HAVE IS THAT
WHILE TODAY
I MAY BE TELLING YOU
WE'RE HANGING
BY OUR FINGERNAILS,
FIVE YEARS FROM NOW,
I MAY BE TELLING YOU,
YOU KNOW, I'M NOT
HANGING ON ANYMORE.
SUDDENLY,
I HAVE MICROORGANISMS
WHICH ARE NOT
ABLE TO BE TREATED
WITH THAT ONE LAST ANTIBIOTIC
THAT I HAVE LEFT.